---
layout: default
title: Submiting bugs and Contributing
headtitle: Contributing - 
---

h2. Help us make Squeryl a world class game changing technology

There are no shortage of interesting problems requiring elegant solutions. Brilliant and talented minds are a welcome addition to Squeryl's DNA. 

h2. A snippet of code to reproduce the bug is ideal.

* The bug will get solved quicker

* It will help to grow the test suite and make 
  it harder for Squeryl to regress !

When that is not possible, sending the AST of the query 
(with Query[T].dumpAst) is also helpful  :

<script type="syntaxhighlighter" class="brush: scala"><![CDATA[
  val q = 
    from(artists, songs)((a,s) =>
      where(a.id === s.artistId)
      groupBy(a.id)
      compute(count)
    )
	
   println(q.dumpAst)
	
]]></script>


h2. Submitting Ideas and Issues

The best place for submitting ideas is on the "discussion group":http://groups.google.com/group/squeryl

For issues and bugs we will start by using "GitHub's issue tracker":http://github.com/max-l/Squeryl/issues


h2. Contributing

Like they say on GitHub : Fork me !!!

"http://github.com/max-l/Squeryl":http://github.com/max-l/Squeryl

Patches are gladly accepted from their original author.  
Along with any patches, please state that the patch is your original work and that you license 
the work to the Squeryl project under the project's open source license.

h2. Building from Sources

Info on building is found "here":http://github.com/max-l/Squeryl/blob/master/readme.txt

At the moment the test mechanism is to call test code from the org.squeryl.tests.allTestsOnH2
this runs the tests within "H2":http://www.h2database.com/ as the name implies. 
(Agreed... Squeryl should migrate to a real test framework, it will eventually happen !!!)

Testing on H2 is really great because it doesn't require you to setup a database, if you build with 
"SBT":http://code.google.com/p/simple-build-tool you will have an "H2":http://www.h2database.com/ database ready to run the tests, and if 
the test succeeds on H2, making it work on other DBs should be straight forward.
