---
layout: default
title: Releases
headtitle: Releases - 
---


h3. 0.9.5

* Dynamic orderBy
* Fix error with enumerations within groupBy

h3. 0.9.5-RC2

* Cryptic error message upon field type deduction failure became more explicit.
* added transaction and inTransaction that takes a SessionFactory


h3. 0.9.5-RC1

* "List of closed tickets":http://www.assembla.com/spaces/squeryl/milestones/381461-0-9-5-rc1

h4. Additional changes : 

* migration to sbt 0.10.x
* Fix case statement with String (varchar) return type for Oracle
* SQLServer adapter quotes idendifiers
* SQL Server: Properly quote identifiers to allow using reserved words in field names
* added def transaction[A](s: Session)(a: =>A)
* Convert === None to SQL o is null
* fail safe close on the jdbc connection when it fails on commit or rollback
* Fixed an issue with retrieval of @ScalaSig data.
* Option type deduction was failing for POSOs with a lot of fields (~50).  This method relies more on scalap.  Also, added turned off SBTs default filtering of the scala-complier.  The compiler is a dependency of scalap and is necessary for the @ScalaSig retrieval and parsing.
* Changed ThreadLocal handing so that they get cleaned up after use. To be sure, all ThreadLocals are also initialized with null values.
* Support Enumerations in IN. Added also a test case of .? that does not compile
* adding update method to the ActiveRecord
* Postgres/DB2/Oracle now honor uninsertable field meta data flag
* Support unupdatable, uninsertable in schema DSL for columns
* Do not persist static fields of POSOs
* Add implicit so that nvl on a Timestamp followed by >= compiles.
* Previously, the compiler would report the following error:
* value >= is not a member of org.squeryl.dsl.NvlFunctionNonNumerical[Option[org.squeryl.PrimitiveTypeMode.TimestampType],org.squeryl.PrimitiveTypeMode.TimestampType]
* added implicit conv for Option[BinaryType]
* Fixed an issue where .leftOuter.inhibitWhen led to an inner join being performed by adding an inhibitWhen method on OuterJoinedQueryable.  This also means that inhibiting a leftOuter will now result in an Option[T] rather than an Option[Option[T]]
* Added implicts to handle lists of UUIDs
* Removal of deprecated  Boolean -> LogicalBoolean implicit conversion
* Fix of : having being inhibited when followed by compute


h3. 0.9.4 Final

* http://www.assembla.com/spaces/squeryl/tickets/52-missing-implicit-for-compute%28min%28atimestamp%29%29 
* http://www.assembla.com/spaces/squeryl/tickets/49-allow-specifying-the-name-of-manytomany-relations 
 
h3. 0.9.4-RC7

* #8    columns get duplicated in the select clause on Posos that have reentrant property accessors
* #9    An enumerations in a subquery within an 'in' operator, causes the outter query to contain the enumeration in the select clause
* #35   Add support for EXISTS / NOT EXISTS
* #32   UUID support
* #14   Assertion fails on self referring OneToManyRelationship
* #34   LeftOuter join does not work in some orderings of the from/join clause
* #40   Nested JOINs aren't mapped correctly
* #10   avg() not supporting BigDecimal type on RC4
* #27   inhibitWhen cannot be used with isNotNull
* #46   def id' on non composite KeyedEntity backed by another field causes assertion failure
* #48   Constant nodes sould have a mapper, or select(&lower("aConstant")) should work
* #1    Convert all tests to ScalaTest

h3. 0.9.4-RC6

*    Tool for consolidating multiple stats DBs
*    Fix for issue 107 (in(Set) in where clause has incorrect number of params)
* 	 Fix #56: Prevent compilation of mass update without where clause
*    Fixed having clause, it was simply not working ...
*    Fix for gitHub issue 101
*    Fix for github issue 99 (join on computed column of aggregate query throws ClassCastException)
*    Fix for (github) issue 100 (Cannot use aggregate query on right hand side of an IN clause)
*    Prevent Yield inspection from following scala.Enumerations fixes #9
*    Yield inspection now cancels the effect of reentrant  calls in property accessors fixes #8
*    Added Hook for influencing YieldInspection (to be used by lift*squeryl*record)
*    Crash early when on/declare is given a null table
*    Support for subqueries in set clause of partial update, fixes #6
*    Closes #93: Add secondary constructors in custom types
*    Aggregate (groupBy and compute) return Group[ProductX] instead of Group[TupleX],
*    Closes #43: Equality expression not reversible in OneToMany
*    fixes #2: Support query pagination in DerbyAdapter
*    implicit conversion from boolean to LogicalBoolean, to allow this kind of syntax sugar :
<pre>      
    students.where(s => s.isMultilingual)
  as opposed to :
    students.where(s=> s.isMultilingual===true)    
</pre>	
*    fixes #3 (assign method in relations broken when using CustomTypes)
*    added Derby support
*    Quote identifiers in emitted SQL
*    Fix for issue 89 : update(T)(t => where(t.id in (subselect)) set(...))" generates invalid SQL
*    Fix bug in Session.cleanupResources.
    Add ability for Session to print info about unclosed Statements to aid in fixing statement leaks.
    Make the iterator returned by AbstractQuery also implement Closeable.
    Force iterator in View.lookup to be closed after use.
	
*    CompositeKey support now up to 9 columns
    Fix for issue 79 (Returning or excepting out of nested transaction block kills session)
    eager closing of preparedStatement for DB updates

h3. 0.9.4-RC3

*  compiled against Scala 2.8.1
*  Externalisation of POSO creation, now part of the FieldMetaDataFactory (for fixing metadata in Lift squery-record)
*  fix for issue 68 Invoking a persisent field during construction causes interference in AST construction
*  Allow the many side of a one-to-many relatonship to be a non-KeyedEntity.
*  Fixed/finished support for Binary/Array[Byte] types. (thanks to Michael Bayne)
*  fix for issue 61: Schema.defaultsTo(T) on Enumerations outputs String instead of Int
*  Fix for issue 59 on/declare expression on KeyedEntity.id doesn't override the schema default attributes
*  MSSQL support (*note* : query pagination, not yet working...)
*  Fix for issue 51 : update fails with KeyedEntities[CompositeKey[...]]
*  Fix for issue 52 : regex expression not passed as param to jdbc prepared statement.


h3. 0.9.4-RC2

*   Fix for issue 48 (Exception thrown in outer join with subquery member)
    the problem was that the ordering of the table expression was not strict, so the from expression
    would get mixed with a join expression.
*   test case for outer join with group by
*   Support for overriding default database column type declaration
*   Fix for issue 45 (Timestamp as query input param gets truncated)
*   @transient applied to PersistenceStatus._isPersisted
*   Fix for issue 16 : SQL 'in' operator now accepts empty lists and inhibits
    "not in (empty)" tautology and returns an always false for "in (empty)"
      http://github.com/max-l/Squeryl/issues#issue/16
*   Fix for issue 42 (problems creating indices: missing single-column indices)
*    Moved annotations package to adhere to the convention
*   Fix for issue 44 (Class cast exception on OneToMany query)


h3. 0.9.4-RC1

Features :

* OneToMany and ManyToMany 	"Relations":relations.html
* "Composite Keys":http://squeryl.org/composite-keys.html
* Support for BigDecimal, (kindly contributed by Antti Tuppurainen)
* Support for Binary column type (graciousness of Mitsutoshi Aoe)
* Support for Injection of custom SQL functions by implit conversions
* Enhancements to "Schema Definition":schema-definition.html : declaration of column attributes for schema creation (indexes, uniqueness constraint, auto increment, etc...)
* Support for DB2 (a huge thanks to Christian Maslen) 
* Fully qualified table names, i.e. support for prefixing table names with the schema name "issue #2":http://github.com/max-l/Squeryl/issues#issue
* Injection of SQL functions by implicit conversion
* regex, lower, upper string functions
* "Dynamic where clause definition":dynamic-queries.html#dyn-where-clause
* Redesign of inner,outer joins with new *join* function
* Lift support (Lift 2.0 M2)
* fixed a bunch of "issue":http://github.com/max-l/Squeryl/issues/closed
 
As well as a few minor enhancements and bug fixes.

Contributors to this release (in alphabetical order) :

*  Alec Wysoker
*  Antti Tuppurainen
*  Christian Maslen
*  David Flemström
*  Mitsutoshi Aoe

h3. 0.9.3 

* Batched updates and inserts
* Optimistic Concurrency Control
* Declarative transactions


h3. 0.9.2

* Paginated Queries
* Dynamic inhibition (removal) of query elements

h3. 0.9.1

First published version of Squeryl

<br/><br/><br/><br/><br/><br/><br/><br/>