---
layout: default
title: Roadmap
---

h3. Features for next release (0.9.5)

* Sql Case Statements

* Remove the need to have zero arg constructions (using "Ross Mellgren's magic":http://github.com/max-l/Squeryl/commit/a1b275895208bf7bb490d3922dc248e6f949e8be)

* improved logging support as described "here":http://groups.google.com/group/squeryl/browse_thread/thread/c5cf187fa6538e90/82205f2a92d0f82c?lnk=gst&q=logger#82205f2a92d0f82c

* Callbacks for collecting performance statistics

* Callbacks for persisted object's lifecycle events  

h3. Wish list of _highly_ desired features (Unscheduled)

* Free text indexing via integration of Lucene

* Support for MS SqlServer


h3. Features at the brainstorming stage

* Caching : the goal here is not to have a _transparent_ cache, but to give a few building blocks to that can be leveraged to build caches at the application level.

* Support for mapping inheritance in the database other than the _map each concreate class to a table_ approach

* A compiler plugin that provides a greater level of validation <br/><br/>
Right now there are still ways that one can write an invalid query, 
i.e. one for which the database will complain at runtime.
For one can call an aggregate function within a group by clause without 
the compiler preventing it.<br/><br/>
I have experimented with ways of enforcing this using the type system,
but it adds complexity not only to the implementation but to the the DSL. <br/><br/>
A plugin could also give more explanatory (SQL specific) messages than the 
ones given by the type system. <br/><br/>
At the moment my only reluctance for such a plugin is the required 
configuration that is required by user code (breaking the minimalism), 
for this reason, the plugin should limit itself to validation.

* Support for mapping inheritance in the database other than the _map each concrete class to a table_ approach

* Schema evolution (other than dropping the whole database and recreating it)

Proposals for new features should go to the "discussion group":http://groups.google.com/group/squeryl
