---
layout: manual
title: Sessions and Transactions
headtitle: Sessions and Transactions - 
---

h2. Bootstrap with org.squeryl.SessionFactory

*SessionFactory.concreteFactory* must be initialized before Squeryl transactions can be invoked : 

<script type="syntaxhighlighter" class="brush: scala"><![CDATA[
  import org.squeryl.SessionFactory

    Class.forName("org.postgresql.Driver");

    SessionFactory.concreteFactory = Some(()=>
	  Session.create(
        java.sql.DriverManager.getConnection("..."),
        new PostgreSqlAdapter))
]]></script>

After the initialization of SessionFactory.concreteFactory, the *transaction* and *inTransaction* block functions (call by names) become available :

<script type="syntaxhighlighter" class="brush: scala"><![CDATA[
  import org.squeryl.PrimitiveTypeMode._
  
	//Squeryl database interaction must occur in a transaction block : 
	transaction {
	   books.insert(new Author(1, "Michel","Folco"))	   	   
	   val a = from(authors)(a=> where(a.lastName === "Folco") select(a))
	}
	
	inTransaction {
	   authors.where(a=> a.lastName === "Pouchkine")
	   
	   //when in a transaction, the current session can be obtained with :
	   val s = Session.currentSession
	}
]]></script>

The 'transaction' function binds the session to the current thread for the duration
of the block, so any method called directly *and indirectly* from the block
will be _in the context_ of the transaction.

h3. Distinction between transaction and inTransaction

* *'transaction'* causes a new transaction to begin and commit after the block's execution, or rollback if an exception occurs. Invoking a transaction always cause a new one to be created, even if called in the context of an existing transaction.

* *'inTransaction'* will create a new transaction if none is in progress and commit it upon completion or rollback on exceptions. If a transaction already exists, it has no effect, the block will execute in the context of the existing transaction. The commit/rollback is handled in this case by the parent transaction block.


h3. Using Squeryl under external transaction management

When used within a framework that already manages transaction, for example a web framework, Squeryl must use the java.sql.Connection that belongs to the "current" context (usually implemented via thread local storage ) this can be accomplished by initializing SessionFactorye.externalTransactionManagementAdapter in the bootstrap code (before any Squeryl code gets to execute).    

<script type="syntaxhighlighter" class="brush: scala"><![CDATA[

SessionFactorye.externalTransactionManagementAdapter = Some(
  () => new Session(
     ...obtain the current session here ...
     new OracleAdapter
  )
) 

]]></script>

h3. Managing transactions manually

Given an org.squeryl.Session, Squeryl statements can be issued with the *using* function :  
 
<script type="syntaxhighlighter" class="brush: scala"><![CDATA[

using(squerylSession) {
  // your Squeryl code here...
} 

]]></script>


* *Note1* : with *using* the user code has the responsibility to close the connection.    
* *Note2* : calling *inTransaction {}* within a *using {}* block has no effect, i.e. the inTransaction behaves as if there was a transaction, i.e. it does nothing (_see inTransaction_). 
