---
layout: manual
title: Design principles
headtitle: Vision - 
---

<h3 class='zquote' align='left'> 
"It seems that perfection is reached not when there is nothing left to add, but when there is nothing left to remove."
</h3>

<p align='right'> _Antoine de Saint-Exupéry_</p>

<!-- <h3 align='center'>Minimalism in all its forms</h3> --> 

h3. Minimalism in all its forms

* What is left out of a framework or language is as important as what is included. It's easy to pile on features, removing them is _very_ hard, and any system will eventually evolve to a point of _feature saturation_ i.e. the point where every new feature added has undesirable interference with existing ones, or the complexity is no longer justified by the functionality it provides. We could describe this state as _software senility_. Only by putting a lot of efforts and thoughts into how to add _as little as possible_ into Squeryl will it have a healthy longevity.

* The functionality that is added should have the smallest conceptual _surface area_ as possible. <br/>Lets define the _*feature density*_ by this ratio : functionality / (conceptual _surface area_). 
The _conceptual surface area_ here means complexity, in terms of API size, number of concepts that need to be introduced. While complexity is certainly a subjective and imprecise concept, extreme _bloatware_ is usually unanimously recognized as such, there is hardly any one for example that could claim that EJB2.0 has a high _feature density_.

<!-- than if it needs a new keyword, operator or API method. A good example of this is the composability of statements and type arithmetic : they cause *zero* increase of the API nor do they need to introduce special keywords, all the complexity is _hidden_ in the Squeryl's engine room. In contrast, the *forUpdate* method in Query[T] increases the _surface area_, but was deemed useful enough to deserve its presence. -->

* Zero tolerance for redundancy : the worst form of redundancy is the one imposed by a framework or library on user code, followed by redundancy in the DSL.

<!-- the counterexample TIMTOWTDI(There is mode than one way to do it) -->


* Keep in mid that a persistence layer addresses only one aspect among many in an application and should leave as much _conceptual room_ as possible for the other aspects.

* Convention over Configuration. 

<!-- Configurability adds flexibility, but it also adds ano -->